More information to docs (#38791)
keycloak/keycloak: docs/documentation/server_admin/topics/admin-console-permissions/fine-grain-v2.adoc

[[_fine_grained_permissions]]

=== Delegating realm administration using permissions

> You can delegate realm management to other administrators, the realm administrators, using the Fine-Grained Admin Permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can delegate realm management to other administrators, the realm administrators, using the fine-grained admin permissions
```

* Clients
* Roles

You can manage permissions for all resources of a given resource type, such as all users in a realm, or
for a specific realm resource, such as a specific user or set of users in the realm.

==== Understanding the scopes of access

Each realm resource supports a well-defined set of management operations, or scopes, that can be performed on them,
such as `view`, `manage`, and resource-specific operations such as `view-members`, if you take groups as an example.

When managing permissions, you are selecting a set of one or more scopes from a resource type to allow realm administrators
to perform specific operations on a resource type. For instance, granting a `view` scope will give access to realm administrators

> to list, search, and view, a realm resource. On the other hand, the `manage` scope will allow administrators to perform updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to list, search, and view a realm resource. On the other hand, the `manage` scope will allow administrators to perform updates
```

and deletes on them.

> The scopes are completely independent of each other. If you give access to `manage` a realm resource it does not mean the
> `view` scope is granted automatically. There is no transitive dependency between scopes. Although this might impact the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scopes are completely independent of each other. If you give access to `manage` a realm resource, that does not mean the
`view` scope is granted automatically. No transitive dependency exists between scopes. Although this might impact the
```

> overall user experience when managing permissions as you need to select individual scopes, from a manageability perspective,
> it makes it a lot easier to identify the permissions that enforce access to a specific scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
overall user experience when managing permissions because you need to select individual scopes, from a manageability perspective,
it is easier to identify the permissions that enforce access to a specific scope.
```

Certain scopes from a resource type have a relationship (not a transitive dependency) to scopes in another resource type.

> This is mainly true when you are managing a resource type that represents a group of realm resources, such as realm groups
> and their members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This relationship is mainly true when you manage a resource type that represents a group of realm resources, such as realm groups
and their members.
```

===== Users Resource Type

The *Users* realm resource type represents the users in a realm. You can manage permissions for users based on the following
set of scopes:

[cols="30%,50%,20%"]
|===
| *Scope*                   | *Description*                                                                                | *Also granted by*

| *view*                    | Defines if a realm administrator can view users. This scope should be set whenever you want  | `view-members`
                              to make users available from queries.
| *manage*                  | Defines if a realm administrator can manage users.                                           | `manage-members`
| *manage-group-membership* | Defines if a realm administrator can assign or unassign users to/from groups.                | None
| *map-roles*               | Defines if a realm administrator can assign or unassign roles to/from users.                 | None
| *impersonate*             | Defines if a realm administrator can impersonate other users.                                | `impersonate-members`
|===

> The user resource type as a strong relationship with some of the permissions you can set to groups. Most of the time,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user resource type has a strong relationship with some of the permissions you can set to groups. Most of the time,
```

users are members of groups and granting access to `view-members` or `manage-members` of a group should also allow
a realm administrator to `view` and `manage` members of that group.

[NOTE]
====

> This feature does not support enforcing access to federated resources. It is a known limitation under consideration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature does not support enforcing access to federated resources. This limitation is under consideration
```

| *map-role*               | Defines if a realm administrator can assign a role (or multiple roles) to a user.
| *map-role-composite*     | Defines if a realm administrator can assign a role (or multiple roles) as a composite to another role.
| *map-role-client-scope*  | Defines if a realm administrator can apply a role (or multiple roles) to a client scope.
|===

The *map-roles* operation does not grant the ability to manage users or assign roles arbitrarily. The administrator must also
have user role mapping permissions on the user.

[NOTE]
====

> * TODO: When mapping client roles, if an administrator has permission to *map-roles*, *map-roles-composite*, or *map-roles-client-scope* for

Reviewer: Is TODO a placeholder?

Author: It is not, I would like to discuss this text with @vramik to understand it better. I'll update this one as soon as I have an answer from him.

Reviewer 2: I believe it's about the fact that if you have client permission for `map-roles` , `map-roles-composite` or `map-roles-client-scope`  you won't reach point where permissions for individual roles are evaluated.

Author: Updated the text.

  a client, permissions for specific roles within that client are not evaluated.
====

==== Enabling admin permissions to a realm

To enable fine-grained admin permissions in a realm, follow these steps:

> * Log in to the administration console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Log in to the Admin Console.
```

Reviewer: We alway say Admin Console

image:images/fine-grain-permissions-tab.png[Fine grain permissions tab]

From this section, you can manage the permissions for realm resources.

[[_managing-permissions]]
==== Managing Permissions

The *Permissions* tab provides an overview of all active permissions within a realm. From here, administrators can create,
update, delete, or search for permissions. It is also possible to pre-evaluate the permissions you have created to check
if they are enforcing access to realm resources as expected.

> For more details, look at the link:#_managing-permissions[Evaluating Permissions] section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details, see link:#_managing-permissions[Evaluating Permissions].
```

* *Policies*: Defines a set of one or more policies that should be evaluated to grant or deny access to the selected resource(s).

After creating the permission, it will automatically take effect when enforcing access to (all) resources and scopes you selected.
Keep that fact in mind when creating and updating permissions in production.

===== Defining permissions for viewing realm resources

This feature relies on a partial evaluation mechanism to partially evaluate the permissions that a realm administrator has
when listing and viewing realm resources. This mechanism will pre-fetch all the permissions set for view-related scopes where the realm administrator
is referenced either directly or indirectly.

Permissions that grant access to `view` a realm resource of a certain type must use one of the following policies to
make them available from queries:

* `User`
* `Group`
* `Role`

By using any of the policies above, {project_name} can pre-calculate the set of resources that a realm administration can view
by looking for a direct (if using a user policy) or indirect (if using a role or group policy) reference to the realm administrator.

> Therefore, decorating queries with access controls that will run at the database level. This capability is mainly important to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the partial evaluation mechanism involves decorating queries with access controls that will run at the database level. This capability is mainly important to
```

Author: Reads better, thanks!

* *Enforce access to*: Defines if the permission should enforce access to all resources of the selected type or to specific resources in a realm.
* *Policies*: Defines a set of one or more policies that should be evaluated to grant or deny access to the selected resource(s).

After creating the permission, it will automatically take effect when enforcing access to (all) resources and scopes you selected.

> Please, keep that in mind that when creating and updating permissions in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep that fact in mind when creating and updating permissions in production.
```

===== Defining permissions for viewing realm resources

This feature relies on a partial evaluation mechanism to partially evaluate the permissions that a realm administrator has
when listing and viewing realm resources. This mechanism will pre-fetch all the permissions set for view-related scopes where the realm administrator
is referenced either directly or indirectly.

Permissions that grant access to `view` a realm resource of a certain type must use one of the following policies to
make them available from queries:

* `User`
* `Group`
* `Role`

By using any of the policies above, {project_name} can pre-calculate the set of resources that a realm administration can view
by looking for a direct (if using a user policy) or indirect (if using a role or group policy) reference to the realm administrator.

> Therefore, decorating queries with access controls that will run at the database level. This capability is mainly important to

Reviewer: Not sure what the subject and verb is here: Therefore, decorating queries with access controls that will run at the database level.

Author: The subject is supposed to be the "partial evaluation mechanism" and the verb `decorate` in "decorating queries ...".

Reviewer: Okay, I think there is some grammatical problem where I not sure actually what is the verb in the sentence. Is "controls" a verb or a noun. Trying again with the suggestion below.

properly allow paginating resources as well as avoid an additional overhead on the server-side when evaluating permissions for each
realm resource returned by queries.

> Partial evaluation and filtering will only take place if the feature is enabled to a realm, and if the user is not granted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Partial evaluation and filtering occurs only if the feature is enabled to a realm, and if the user is not granted
```

with view-related administrative roles like `view-users` or `view-clients`. For instance, it will not happen for regular server administrators granted
with the `admin` role.

When querying resources, the partial evaluation mechanism works as follows:

* Resolve all the permissions for a certain resource type that reference the realm administrator

> * Pre-evaluate each permission to check if the realm administrator is allowed or not access to the resources associated with the permission

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Pre-evaluate each permission to check if the realm administrator does or does not have access to the resources associated with the permission
```

* Decorate database queries based on the resources granted or denied

> As a result, the result set of a query will hold only the realm resources where realm administrators have access to any of the view-related scopes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, the resulting set of a queries hold only the realm resources where realm administrators have access to any of the view-related scopes.
```

Author: I would keep it as is because queries have a result set, the data returned from the database.

Reviewer: Okay that's fine.

===== Searching Permissions

> The administration console provides several ways to search for permissions, supporting the following capabilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Admin Console provides several ways to search for permissions, supporting the following capabilities:
```

* Search for permissions that contain a specific string in their *Name*
* Search for permissions of a specific resource type, such as *Users*
* Search for permissions of a specific resource type that apply to a particular resource (such as *Users* resource type for user `myadmin`).
* Search for permissions of a specific resource type with a given scope (such as *Users* resource type permissions with the *manage* scope).
* Search for permissions of a specific resource type that apply to a particular resource and have a specific scope (such as *Users* resource
type permissions with the *manage* scope for user `myadmin`).

> image:images/fine-grain-search.png[Fine grained permissions search]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Fine grained permissions search
image:images/fine-grain-search.png[Fine grained permissions search]
```

These capabilities allow server administrators to perform queries on their universe of permissions and identify which ones

> are enforcing access to a set of one or more realm resources and their scopes. Together with the evaluation tool available from the
> `Evaluation` tab, they provide a key management tool for managing permissions in a realm. Look at the <<_evaluating-permissions, Evaluating Permissions>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are enforcing access to a set of one or more realm resources and their scopes. Combined with the evaluation tool on the
*Evaluation* tab, they provide a key management tool for managing permissions in a realm. See <<_evaluating-permissions, Evaluating Permissions>>
```

for more details.

==== Managing Policies

The *Policies* tab allows administrators to define conditions using different access control methods to determine whether
a permission should be granted to an administrator attempting to perform operations on a realm resource. When managing permissions,
you must associate at least a single policy to grant or deny access to a realm resource.

Policies are basically conditions that will evaluate to either a `GRANT` or a `DENY`. Their outcome will decide whether
a permission should be granted or denied.

> A permission is only granted  if all its associated policies evaluate to a `GRANT`. Otherwise, the permission is denied

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A permission is only granted if all its associated policies evaluate to a `GRANT`. Otherwise, the permission is denied
```

and a realm administrator will not be able to access the protected resource.

{project_name} provides a set of built-in policies that you can choose from:

image:images/select-policy-type.png[Selecting a policy type]

> Once you have a well-defined and stable permission model for your realm, less likely you be creating new policies but just
> reusing existing ones to create more permissions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have a well-defined and stable permission model for your realm, less need exists to create policies. You can instead reuse existing policies to create more permissions.
```

> For more details about each policy type, take a look at link:{authorizationguide_link}#_policy_overview[Managing policies].
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details about each policy type, see link:{authorizationguide_link}#_policy_overview[Managing policies].

```

[[_evaluating-permissions]]
==== Evaluating Permissions

The *Evaluation* tab provides a testing environment where administrators can verify that permissions are enforcing access
as expected. The administrator can see what permissions are involved when enforcing access to a particular resource and what the outcome is.

You need to provide a set of fields in order to run an evaluation:

* `User`, the realm administrator or the subject trying to access a resource
* `Resource Type`, the resource type you want to evaluate
* `Resource Selector`, depending on the selected `Resource Type` you will be prompted to select a specific realm resource like a user, group, or client.
* `Authorization scope`, the scope or the operation you want to evaluate. If not provided, the evaluation will happen for all the scopes of the selected resource type.

> image:images/fine-grain-evaluation.png[Fine grained permissions evaluation tab]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Fine grained permissions evaluation tab
image:images/fine-grain-evaluation.png[Fine grained permissions evaluation tab]
```

By clicking the `Evaluate` button, the server will evaluate all the permissions associated with the selected resource and scopes
just like if the selected `User` were trying to access the resource when using the administration console or the Admin API.

For instance, in the example above you can see that the user `myadmin` can *manage* user `user-1` because a `Allow managing all realm users` permission
voted to a `PERMIT`, therefore granting access to the `manage` scope. However, all the other scopes were denied.

> Together with the searching capabilities from the `Permissions` tab, you can do troubleshooting and identify any permission that
> is or is not behaving as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Combined with the searching capabilities from the *Permissions* tab, you can perform troubleshooting to identify any permission that
is or is not behaving as expected.
```

When evaluating permissions, the following rules apply:

> * The outcome from resource-specific permissions have precedence of broader permissions that give access to all resources of a certain type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The outcome from resource-specific permissions have precedence over broader permissions that give access to all resources of a certain type
```

> * If there are no permissions for a specific resource, access will be granted based on the permission that grants access to all resources of a certain type
> * The outcome from different permissions that enforce access to a specific resource will only grant access if they all permit access to the resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If no permissions exist for a specific resource, access will be granted based on the permission that grants access to all resources of a certain type
* The outcome from different permissions that enforce access to a specific resource will only grant access if they all permit access to the resource
```

allowing members of the `realm-admins` group to manage members of realm groups, but preventing them from managing members of the `realm-admins` group
themselves.

[[_realm_access_control]]
==== Accessing a Realm administration console as a Realm Administrator

> Realm administrators can access a dedicated realm-specific administration console, which allows them to manage resources within their assigned realm.
> This is separate from the main Keycloak administration console, which is typically used by server administrators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Realm administrators can access a dedicated realm-specific administration console that allows them to manage resources within their assigned realm.
This is separate from the main {project_name} Admin Console, which is typically used by server administrators.
```

For more details on dedicated realm administration consoles and available roles, refer to: <<_per_realm_admin_permissions, Dedicated admin consoles>>.

To access the administration console, a realm administrator must have at least one of the following roles assigned, depending on the resources they
need to administer:

- *query-users* – Required to query realm users.
- *query-groups* – Required to query realm groups.
- *query-clients* – Required to query realm clients.

By granting any of these roles to a realm user, they will be able to access the administration console, but only for the
areas that correspond to roles granted. For instance, if you assign the `query-users` role, the realm administrator
will only have access to the `Users` section in the administration console. If an administrator is responsible for
multiple resource types (such as both users and groups), they must have all the corresponding "query-*" roles assigned.

These roles enable basic access to query resources but do not grant permission to view or modify them. To grant or deny access
to realm resources you need to set up the permissions for any of the operations available from each resource type.

> For more details, look at the link:#_managing-permissions[Managing Permissions] section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details, see  link:#_managing-permissions[Managing Permissions].
```
